<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>CHAPTER IX</h2>
		<p>Scythrop grew every day more reserved, mysterious, and distrait; and
gradually lengthened the duration of his diurnal seclusions in his
tower. Marionetta thought she perceived in all this very manifest
symptoms of a warm love cooling.</p>
		<p>It was seldom that she found herself alone with him in the morning,
and, on these occasions, if she was silent in the hope of his speaking
first, not a syllable would he utter; if she spoke to him indirectly,
he assented monosyllabically; if she questioned him, his answers
were brief, constrained, and evasive. Still, though her spirits were
depressed, her playfulness had not so totally forsaken her, but that
it illuminated at intervals the gloom of Nightmare Abbey; and if, on
any occasion, she observed in Scythrop tokens of unextinguished or
returning passion, her love of tormenting her lover immediately got
the better both of her grief and her sympathy, though not of her
curiosity, which Scythrop seemed determined not to satisfy. This
playfulness, however, was in a great measure artificial, and usually
vanished with the irritable Strephon, to whose annoyance it had been
exerted. The Genius Loci, the <i>tutela</i> of Nightmare Abbey, the
spirit of black melancholy, began to set his seal on her pallescent
countenance. Scythrop perceived the change, found his tender
sympathies awakened, and did his utmost to comfort the afflicted
damsel, assuring her that his seeming inattention had only proceeded
from his being involved in a profound meditation on a very hopeful
scheme for the regeneration of human society. Marionetta called him
ungrateful, cruel, cold-hearted, and accompanied her reproaches with
many sobs and tears; poor Scythrop growing every moment more soft
and submissive—till, at length, he threw himself at her feet, and
declared that no competition of beauty, however dazzling, genius,
however transcendent, talents, however cultivated, or philosophy,
however enlightened, should ever make him renounce his divine
Marionetta.</p>
		<p>'Competition!' thought Marionetta, and suddenly, with an air of the
most freezing indifference, she said, 'You are perfectly at liberty,
sir, to do as you please; I beg you will follow your own plans,
without any reference to me.'</p>
		<p>Scythrop was confounded. What was become of all her passion and her
tears? Still kneeling, he kissed her hand with rueful timidity, and
said, in most pathetic accents, 'Do you not love me, Marionetta?'</p>
		<p>'No,' said Marionetta, with a look of cold composure: 'No.' Scythrop
still looked up incredulously. 'No, I tell you.'</p>
		<p>'Oh! very well, madam,' said Scythrop, rising, 'if that is the case,
there are those in the world—'</p>
		<p>'To be sure there are, sir;—and do you suppose I do not see through
your designs, you ungenerous monster?'</p>
		<p>'My designs? Marionetta!'</p>
		<p>'Yes, your designs, Scythrop. You have come here to cast me off, and
artfully contrive that it should appear to be my doing, and not yours,
thinking to quiet your tender conscience with this pitiful stratagem.
But do not suppose that you are of so much consequence to me: do not
suppose it: you are of no consequence to me at all—none at all:
therefore, leave me: I renounce you: leave me; why do you not leave
me?'</p>
		<p>Scythrop endeavoured to remonstrate, but without success. She
reiterated her injunctions to him to leave her, till, in the
simplicity of his spirit, he was preparing to comply. When he had
nearly reached the door, Marionetta said, 'Farewell.' Scythrop looked
back. 'Farewell, Scythrop,' she repeated, 'you will never see me
again.'</p>
		<p>'Never see you again, Marionetta?'</p>
		<p>'I shall go from hence to-morrow, perhaps to-day; and before we meet
again, one of us will be married, and we might as well be dead, you
know, Scythrop.'</p>
		<p>The sudden change of her voice in the last few words, and the burst
of tears that accompanied them, acted like electricity on the
tender-hearted youth; and, in another instant, a complete
reconciliation was accomplished without the intervention of words.</p>
		<p>There are, indeed, some learned casuists, who maintain that love has
no language, and that all the misunderstandings and dissensions of
lovers arise from the fatal habit of employing words on a subject to
which words are inapplicable; that love, beginning with looks, that
is to say, with the physiognomical expression of congenial mental
dispositions, tends through a regular gradation of signs and symbols
of affection, to that consummation which is most devoutly to be
wished; and that it neither is necessary that there should be, nor
probable that there would be, a single word spoken from first to
last between two sympathetic spirits, were it not that the arbitrary
institutions of society have raised, at every step of this very simple
process, so many complicated impediments and barriers in the shape
of settlements and ceremonies, parents and guardians, lawyers,
Jew-brokers, and parsons, that many an adventurous knight (who, in
order to obtain the conquest of the Hesperian fruit, is obliged to
fight his way through all these monsters), is either repulsed at the
onset, or vanquished before the achievement of his enterprise: and
such a quantity of unnatural talking is rendered inevitably necessary
through all the stages of the progression, that the tender and
volatile spirit of love often takes flight on the pinions of some of
the [Greek: epea pteroenta], or <i>winged words</i> which are pressed into
his service in despite of himself.</p>
		<p>At this conjuncture, Mr Glowry entered, and sitting down near them,
said, 'I see how it is; and, as we are all sure to be miserable do
what we may, there is no need of taking pains to make one another more
so; therefore, with God's blessing and mine, there'—joining their
hands as he spoke.</p>
		<p>Scythrop was not exactly prepared for this decisive step; but he could
only stammer out, 'Really, sir, you are too good;' and Mr Glowry
departed to bring Mr Hilary to ratify the act.</p>
		<p>Now, whatever truth there may be in the theory of love and language,
of which we have so recently spoken, certain it is, that during Mr
Glowry's absence, which lasted half an hour, not a single word was
said by either Scythrop or Marionetta.</p>
		<p>Mr Glowry returned with Mr Hilary, who was delighted at the prospect
of so advantageous an establishment for his orphan niece, of whom he
considered himself in some manner the guardian, and nothing remained,
as Mr Glowry observed, but to fix the day.</p>
		<p>Marionetta blushed, and was silent. Scythrop was also silent for a
time, and at length hesitatingly said, 'My dear sir, your goodness
overpowers me; but really you are so precipitate.'</p>
		<p>Now, this remark, if the young lady had made it, would, whether she
thought it or not—for sincerity is a thing of no account on these
occasions, nor indeed on any other, according to Mr Flosky—this
remark, if the young lady had made it, would have been perfectly
<i>comme il faut</i>; but, being made by the young gentleman, it was <i>toute
autre chose</i>, and was, indeed, in the eyes of his mistress, a most
heinous and irremissible offence. Marionetta was angry, very angry,
but she concealed her anger, and said, calmly and coldly, 'Certainly,
you are much too precipitate, Mr Glowry. I assure you, sir, I have
by no means made up my mind; and, indeed, as far as I know it, it
inclines the other way; but it will be quite time enough to think of
these matters seven years hence. Before surprise permitted reply, the
young lady had locked herself up in her own apartment.</p>
		<p>'Why, Scythrop,' said Mr Glowry, elongating his face exceedingly, 'the
devil is come among us sure enough, as Mr Toobad observes: I thought
you and Marionetta were both of a mind.'</p>
		<p>'So we are, I believe, sir,' said Scythrop, gloomily, and stalked away
to his tower.</p>
		<p>'Mr Glowry,' said Mr Hilary, 'I do not very well understand all this.'</p>
		<p>'Whims, brother Hilary,' said Mr Glowry; 'some little foolish love
quarrel, nothing more. Whims, freaks, April showers. They will be
blown over by to-morrow.'</p>
		<p>'If not,' said Mr Hilary, 'these April showers have made us April
fools.'</p>
		<p>'Ah!' said Mr Glowry, 'you are a happy man, and in all your
afflictions you can console yourself with a joke, let it be ever so
bad, provided you crack it yourself. I should be very happy to laugh
with you, if it would give you any satisfaction; but, really, at
present, my heart is so sad, that I find it impossible to levy a
contribution on my muscles.'</p>
		<p>*       *       *       *       *</p>		
</section></body></html>